---
title: In God We Trust?
when: 10.05.2013
---
The question as to whether the United States of America is a Christian nation is a delicate and nuanced topic. In a 2012 poll of religious affiliation in America, 73 to 76 percent of the nation identified as believing in some form of Christianity. The religious Right proponents frequently refer to the Christian heritage of America, but more importantly assert the notion that the Founders intended to establish a Christian nation. One reaction to this claim is why should anyone care at all what the Founders envisioned back then, and to what degree should that influence a citizen’s contemporary life? It is crucial to understand that every country is continuously in search of an essence and identity. This essence can reveal itself in different forms, and includes spirits of nationalism and patriotism to cultural identification with history and legend. In the 1930s Adolf Hitler attached Germany’s essence to many Aryan myths about superiority and purity, leading much of Europe into the worst war the world had ever seen. When considering the essence of America, it is important to realize <!--more-->that the Founders play an integral role in our nation’s ancestry and help define America’s essence so one can begin to address modern politics. To begin, I will lay out the question Pastor Jerry Falwell raises as to whether America was founded as a Christian nation in excerpts of Listen, America! His message is a provocative and complicated proposition that possesses many political motivations and desires within its rhetoric. I will detail Falwell’s chief assertion and supporting evidence that claims America was founded as a Christian nation. Then, I will hold his points under scrutiny with an indispensable historical perspective and evidence from the Founders lives and documents. To end, I consider a few of the implications of Falwell’s arguments and discuss possible underlying objectives of his document.

In the 1960s and 70s America went through a number of social and political events that reshaped the country and its people. Women’s and civil rights movements quickly gained popularity, immigration laws began to change in 1965, and most importantly the U.S. became heavily involved in the Vietnam War in 1965. The Vietnam War was critical in changing the American psyche and essence, and altogether morphed how citizens thought of themselves and their country. In Listen, America! (1980), Southern Baptist Pastor Jerry Falwell calls for a return to more ancient American and Christian set of morals in society. Many of Falwell’s subliminal intents arise from this metamorphosis of American culture and ways. Falwell ultimately believes that America has strayed from the Founder’s vision of a free and devout America: “If Americans will face the truth, our nation can be turned around and can be saved from the evils and the destruction that have fallen upon every other nation that has turned its back on God.” Falwell has a very romanticized view of some past time in America when things were purportedly better off: “I believe that Americans want to see this country come back to basics, back to values, back to biblical morality, back to sensibility, and back to patriotism” (Falwell, Listen, America!, 19). This last quote reveals his ultimate political agenda by asking the overarching question about America being a Christian nation. It is important to note, however, that his criticism of modern culture is reactionary and heavily visceral rather than rooted in objective historical evidence. Like many evangelist Christians of the 1980s, he dislikes much of current U.S. policy and social customs, and thus vaguely suggests a return to a time where his own personal policies may hypothetically fit—also a time in which religious affiliation was more pronounced and widespread in America. It is easier to call for a return nowadays—just as many evangelists did after the cultural “backlash” of the 1980s—with any set of challenging contemporary issues America faces, but there were unquestionably countless problems in the last 250 years of American history, as well. 

Within his essay, Falwell also emphasizes the sanctity of freedom and that America is a nation ordained by God and thus Christian at its core (Falwell, Listen, America!, 16). His arguments are largely circular—often arguing backward from a conclusion and finding vague scriptural evidence—and therefore lack persuasiveness. In addition, according to Falwell, the notion of a free-enterprise and openly-competitive economy is contained within the Bible, and certain movements and practices such as the Equal Rights movement for women, gay rights, and welfare are detrimental to our nation’s success (Falwell, Listen, America!, 12). For Falwell, the essence of America is strongly tied to patriotism and adoration of one’s own country.

Beside the misogyny and obvious bigoted inability to cope with difference present in his essay, Falwell’s main arguments for why America is a Christian nation derive from scriptural references or from trivial instances of religious vocabulary in American institutions. In such a sweeping historical claim, one would expect copious citations and instances from America’s history to validate his point. For instance, he states that because most bills and coins still have “In God We Trust” inscribed in them, the nation must be Christian at its heart. Such a choice of evidence is wrongfully extrapolated to fit his thesis, and seriously simplified from what is undoubtedly a complex piece of history. In all, Falwell misconstrues much of the historical evidence in his essay and only picks signs that loosely support his original supposition. 

To thoroughly analyze whether America is truly a Christian nation, it is essential to consider the historical evidence and scrutinize the true motivations and ambitions of the Founders. The question Falwell poses is not a simple yes or no answer, but rather a mixed bag of historical events that can be interpreted in many contrasting ways. Clearly Christianity and religion have played a vital philosophical and historic role in early American politics. In the Declaration of Independence, the document clearly states that humans are “endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights…” and any future nation’s citizens vow to uphold it for the sake of “Protection of divine Providence.” In particular, many members of the religious Right regularly cite George Washington as a strict Christian adherent. Many of his speeches are filled with references to God or some Divine being. Falwell would certainly look to an American political leader such as Washington to buttress his point. In his first Inaugural Address, he praises God: “…fervent supplications to that Almighty being who rules the universe… .” (ibid). Ostensibly this is a great source for Falwell and other advocates of a Christian nation with Christian founders, but Washington’s references have little in common with modern evangelical Christianity. In fact, many of the early Founders—most notably Thomas Jefferson—championed a religious belief called rational theism, which was a form of logical theology very much in tune with Enlightenment thought. Washington did not believe in the sanctity of Christ or the Holy Trinity, but instead conceived of an overarching God that encouraged good behavior and morals (Davis, In Defense, 26). Washington likely assumed with the popularity of Christianity at the time and common moral accepted norms he would appeal to his audience more persuasively by including certain comments, much like current Presidential candidates do uniformly. In addition, in a treaty with Tripoli of Barbary in 1796, the United States resolutely commented on this exact issue: “As the Government of the United States of America is not, in any sense, founded on the Christian religion,—as it has in itself no character of enmity against the laws, religion, or tranquility, of Musclemen [Muslims]…” (Davis, In Defense, 27). Furthermore, it is particularly significant to recall there was no accepted theory of evolution present during the Founders’ time—Charles Darwin did not publish his theory of evolution until the 1830s. Consequently, it was relatively commonplace to believe in some religious or divine figure for guidance. Therefore, the appointment of chaplains to the military and the reading of prayer before Congressional session and Thanksgiving meals were not at all contentious. The Founders fit a distinct historical context and Falwell oversimplifies an intricate relationship with religion and moral customs to argue his point.

Another large portion of evidence for proponents of a non-Christian America comes from a letter written by Thomas Jefferson on January 1, 1802 to the Danbury Baptists of Connecticut. In the letter—which only spans two short paragraphs—Jefferson mentions a “wall of separation” between Church and state as a result of the first amendment of the Constitution. The letter itself is very cursory and brief—a perspective shared by Supreme Court Justice William Rehnquist in Wallace v. Jaffrey—and perhaps possesses an underserved importance when scholars consider the relationship between religion and politics in the United States. Many questions arise as a result: Was the letter a political move? Was the message simply perfunctory and Jefferson was too busy to consider the potential historical weight of the letter? Considering how sophisticated and scrupulous Thomas Jefferson is know for being in his writing and politics, it is unlikely he wrote the letter facetiously or superficially (Davis, In Defense, 29-40). Jefferson—like Washington in many regards—was an advocate of rational theism (ibid). In fact, he is known for a redacted version of the Bible in which he removed all non-rational or ostensibly fantastical images and explanations (ibid). Perhaps the most important factor in his response was that—even though recently elected—Jefferson had defeated John Adams for the 1800 presidency. In the election, Adams exploited Jefferson’s support of unorthodox Christianity and presented him to be an anti-religious candidate (Davis, In Defense, 28). Thus, Jefferson may have been restoring some of his public image toward religious protection and support through the letter to the Baptists. Jefferson certainly believed in the free practice and defense of freedom of religion, but assuredly did not condone the United States as a Christian nation, nor intend to mix religion and politics as President. It is also reasonable that Jefferson is attempting to clarify his beliefs in this letter by calling for a wall of separation, while also managing to ingratiate himself with the Connecticut Baptists.

In all, it is clear that Falwell’s true ambition is to shift the future of America into a direction of conservative Christianity as defined by Falwell in his essay. This is a society with views of anti- welfare, homosexuality, and feminism, and ironically constrains life in America away from the freedom and liberty he cherishes in his essay. His proposal that America is and was founded as a Christian nation does not hold up against the large body of historical evidence that strongly opposes his point. Ultimately, the Founders internal and political convictions were so diverse that it is irrational to attempt to determine one “original intent” from history or any written document. Falwell makes this erroneous assumption and overlooks the complexity of history and America’s modern situation. In particular, he overlooks the plain fact that the religious beliefs of most Founders—though many considered themselves Christian—had little or nothing in common with current evangelical Christianity.