---
title: Personhood Arguments in Roe v. Wade
when: 11.07.2013
---
Even before the landmark decision of Roe v. Wade in 1973, abortion has always been a sensitive and contentious topic in American public and political spheres. The explosive disagreements about the true nature and definition of a fetus are not conversations from which one can remain emotionally detached, and thus public discussions are often hot-tempered and considerably divisive. In the Roe v. Wade decision, the United States Supreme Court used historical, legal, and philosophical arguments to find a legal justification for a right to privacy of the mother that extended to abortion practices within the first trimester of pregnancy. There are myriad theoretical situations and possibilities surrounding abortion, but I will focus strictly on one of the most influential and encompassing concepts: determining the personhood of the fetus and the various consequences each opinion provokes. I will then evaluate the legitimacy of the Roe v. Wade decision and the fetal personhood stance implicitly given in the court case, including popular arguments for and against this notion. I will conclude in favor of the court’s decision, but realize each abortion is a private and unique matter that cannot be easily generalized with moral ethics.<!--more-->

The ruling set forth in the Roe v. Wade decision declared that individuals have a reasonable—but not absolute—right to privacy in personal matters, voiding a vast number of states’ policies either criminalizing or outlawing abortion practices while discreetly making many moral assumptions in the process. The principal idea of the decision is an extension of a reasonable right to privacy for the mother regarding abortion, and denial of the same privacy rights to the fetus. These liberties, however, are not explicitly granted to Americans in the Constitution. In reviewing relevant case law, such as the 1891 decision in Union Pacific Railroad Co. v. Botsford, and their own analysis, most justices agreed individuals possess a reasonable implied right to privacy from the Bill of Rights and specifically the first, fourth, fifth, ninth, and chiefly fourteenth amendments. The fourteenth amendment’s due process clause ultimately asserts that no state can deprive Americans of procedural or substantive due process. Due process is not simply a stringent procedure, for it encompasses changing contemporary views and thus the courts made a normative decision in justifying privacy rights using this clause. Similarly, in a joint dissent filed by justices Byron R. White and William H. Rehnquist, they argue the court purposefully misinterpreted the fourteenth amendment with the political goal of providing abortion rights for women. Their dissent is predominantly persuasive, as the decision from the court appears contingent and almost revolutionary because of the ambiguity of law they cite in establishing this constitutional right. Although some may argue the court legislated from the bench in this trial, it often the duty of the Supreme Court to contextualize modern cases and view them with contemporary mindsets. For instance, with the technological revolution of the 21st century, the courts must apply law written over 200 years ago to modern issues regarding internet and network security. Likewise, Michael McConnell argues the court did not care about making a specific, persuasive argument for privacy rights, as it was “broad enough” to encompass a mother’s choice to terminate a pregnancy. Furthermore, McConnell points out rights of privacy have never been applied to protect against laws banning drug use or self-inflicted personal harm. However, McConnell’s parallels lack complete validity because it is overtly clear that abortion lacks the criminal character and similarity to many of his examples, and he is furtively arguing backward against the court decision in defense of his own moral conceptions. Lastly, he explains that any amount of privacy rights granted to the mother should not confer the right to injure a third-party such as the fetus. Therefore, it is impossible for the court to have established privacy rights without first determining that the fetus lacks personhood. Additionally, by taking a “uncertain” stance regarding the personhood of the fetus, the court was able to declare the state’s interest as not compelling enough to violate the newly declared constitutional right of privacy. However, that constitutional right rests on the assumption that the fetus is not a person that possesses legal rights as another adult would. Clearly, it is important to separately consider the personhood of the fetus, for it plays a key role in determining the rights of the mother during an abortion.

The justifications supporting the belief that life begins at conception have many legitimate counterarguments. First, it is critical to understand that biology and science cannot objectively pinpoint when a fetus becomes a “person.” All arguments for or against fetal personhood derive from personal moral conceptions and interpretations of science. Some believe our rational capacity is what distinguishes homo sapiens from other living organisms, and thus until ample fetal brain development, the fetus is not human. How, then, would the mentally impaired qualify under this theory? This argument would permit the killing of mentally handicapped individuals, as they do not match the given definition of human. If our defining characteristic of humanity is not rationality, perhaps it is our ability to establish meaningful connections and relationships with others. Thus, until the mother mentally considers the fetus her “child” and others build emotional connections to it, the fetus lacks personhood. Unfortunately, this establishes personhood as a quality that is conferred on one person by another, and strips humans of any innate condition of humanity. It is reasonable to claim that every person must possess an inherent property of humanness, unless it is extended to every fetus as a soul from God at some point. Following that argument, then, how does one explain the splitting of an embryo into two or more unique organisms during the first two weeks of fertilization? If religious adherents claim God instills a soul in the fetus at conception, is that soul divided as the cells are? What is most important to realize from these examples is that the definitions are equally as nebulous as attempting to define when life begins for the fetus. A more compelling case for the legality of abortion is initially accepting the personhood of the fetus and—from there—determining the moral right to abortion of the mother.

If one accepts that a fetus qualifies as human, it is viable to logically conclude either a pro-life or pro-choice perspective. A popular pro-life argument customarily asserts that the fetus is a person with a “right to life,” and then proceeds to claim abortion is murder—and thus legally impermissible. To begin, the concept of a “right to life” is an unreasonable notion, for the State clearly cannot guarantee life. In actuality, the State openly endorses the use of killing for domestic order: police shoot and kill criminals and the military regularly engages in wars, which in many cases can be described as murder for political gains. If an individual allows for exceptions to murder—or abortion in this case—in instances such as capital punishment, abortion, assisted suicide, rape, or war then they clearly lack full conviction in their own anti-murder philosophy. Thus accepting fetal personhood but opposing abortion requires an unwavering standard or a more precise moral justification than simply opposing the murder of the fetus. Many pro-life proponents spend the majority of their argument establishing that the fetus is a person, but not enough addressing the implications after and how these lead to a disallowance of abortion. Judith Thomson, professor of philosophy at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, argues that “…it is by no means enough to show that the fetus is a person, and to remind us that all persons have a right to life—we need to be shown also that killing the fetus violates its right to life, that is, that abortion is unjust killing.”  From this proposal, it is crucial to clarify what is unjust versus what is morally indecent. Thomson describes a situation in which a burglar—despite one’s best efforts to protect their house—breaks into someone’s home to escape the cold and steal money for food. After the owner calls the police, the burglar is evicted and later dies during the cold of the night. Has the owner unjustly killed the burglar? Certainly they were not generous or hospitable, but that is understandable as they barred their windows and did not invite him inside. The burglar has no right to reside in their house, and thus the owner is justified in removing him from their house and does not unjustly kill him. Morally, these arguments—however persuasive—tend to seem heartless or unsympathetic at times, but a dispassionate, logical consideration of the situation is what ultimately forms the grounds for solid legal defense. Granted, what Thomson fails to fully address is that fetus is not simply any person, but one that possesses particular rights and potentially imposes additional responsibilities on the mother. Therefore, many of Thomson’s analogies lack credibility, as they do not appreciate this connection. Perhaps a more accurate consideration is if the burglar were somehow related to the owner. It would then be simpler to argue that the owner has some obligation or responsibility to take in the burglar. On the other hand, American philosopher Francis Beckwith contends that if the fetus is a person, and child rearing is at least as difficult as pregnancy, then why is it legal to kill a fetus if we forbid infanticide or the killing of children? Thomson clearly avoids any naturalistic argument by carefully selecting her analogies. Beckwith’s counterargument to Thomson’s rationalization would be convincingly defeated had Thomson included more specificity regarding the mother’s responsibilities. She fails to acknowledge that the mother’s duties toward her child before birth and after birth vary significantly. Before birth, the mother may abort the fetus if she does so by just principle, but after birth the mother assumes the responsibilities of raising the child, which include caring for its health and protection. Once these responsibilities are required of the mother, infanticide becomes a legal violation. In all, it is apparent one can conclude a pro-life argument with a consistent and unchanging opposition to murder or a pro-choice theory following Thomson’s logical development that ultimately denies only an unjust killing of the fetus.

In reconsideration of the legitimacy of the Roe v. Wade decision, I find sound rationale for legalizing abortion—mostly on Thomson’s grounds of accepting fetal personhood. As moral arguments are interpretations of science and religion, it is impossible to fully deny any person’s view on the issue, but rather one can elucidate holes or inconsistencies in others’ arguments. In addition, we must acknowledge there are copious arguments for and against abortion not addressed in this paper. Furthermore, although we accepted that every person possesses a right to life, this is a debatable assumption that originates from dialectical theology and is conveniently used to standardize arguments regarding personhood. Lastly, because abortion is a personal matter that is legally permissible, it is sensible to grant these privacy rights and subsequent free will to any woman instead of imposing legal rights that derive from controversial and undeterminable moral arguments.