---
title: Examining Jean Elshtain's Just War Theory
when: 12.04.2013
---
After the indelible scarring of the attacks on September 11, 2001, the United States quickly found legal and political justification for declaring a heavily controversial “war on terror.” The Bush administration cited many elements of just-war theory along with an underlying ethic of Christian realism in their rationale for invasion of Afghanistan and Iraq. American ethicist and political philosopher Jean Bethke Elshtain offers many justifications congruent with the Bush administration in her book Just War Against Terror, and in particular addresses many of the philosophical disputes associated with the United State’s decision after 9/11. To begin, I will lay out her argument beginning with the basic considerations of why she deems war as requisite in certain scenarios, along with many popular counterarguments to her theory. Next, I examine her theory when applied to the wars against terrorism in Afghanistan and Iraq, indicating many of the shortcomings and difficulties with her assertions. Finally, I conclude that her overall rationalization for America’s war on terror using just-war theory is unfounded and lacks valid and persuasive character.<!--more-->

Elshtain’s argument in Just War Against Terror builds upon a notion of Christian realism and insists war is the only logical and practical approach to successful counterterrorism efforts and protection of a nation’s people. Though not in accordance with the progression of her book, it is essential to first examine her theological outlook on war and on individual human responsibility, as it is a cornerstone of her later arguments. Her argument follows that of American theologian and ethicist Reinhold Niebuhr, who ultimately believes violence is legitimized in pursuit of peace and political justice: “As long as the world of man remains a place where nature and God, the real and the ideal, meet, human progress will depend upon the judicious use of the forces of nature in the service of the ideal.”  He maintains that humans unwaveringly act in self-interest when attempting to act for the good, and thus cannot govern on the basis of love. Instead, Reinhold Niebuhr and Elshtain claim humans possess some awareness of justice despite their sinful nature and enact this justice through force and power, which inevitably leads to conflict and war. Conversely, H. Richard Niebuhr argues—along with his brother Reinhold Niebuhr to an extent—for moral self-reflection, introspection, and repentance to help prevent rash or injudicious political action. For him, reflection and healing—rather than war—is the only true means of ending the constant cycle of violence in the world. Elshtain continues by defending Reinhold Niebuhr’s reasoning, and argues that power must be used to restrain and punish evil in the world. Stanley Hauerwas disputes this claim by emphasizing the importance of excluding religious vocabulary in just-war theory: “...it is God who deals with evil, and it’s presumptuous for humans to assume that our task is to do what only God can do. Advocates of “just-war” should be the first to object to the language of evil because that characterization threatens to turn war into a crusade.”  Although not the focus of this essay, the concept of “Christian realism” is an accepted belief among many Christians who support just-war theory, and differs from Christian pacifism simply in its particular interpretation of the meaning of Christian love and how effectively humans can express this love and implement it in political realities.
Elshtain maintains that a certain manifestation of radicalized Islamic fundamentalists possess an insatiable and immutable hatred for American institutions and people because of America’s Christian heritage, separation of Church and state implicit in the Constitution, and personal liberties. Thus, any alteration of foreign policy at all would not prevent terrorists such as Osama bin Laden from despising the U.S., as their detestation derives from American Constitutional principles. She concedes removal from Muslim countries—a view substantiated by many Middle Eastern diplomats—would likely reduce the threat of American terrorist attacks, but declares that America is the only country with the “power and will to play this role,” and therefore has a responsibility to enforce human rights around the world. Although this is a noble cause on the surface, I would argue it is the purpose of organizations like the United Nations, who—together with the voices of its 193 constituents—fully weigh the political, economic, and social implications of foreign military affairs before action. The United States has no legal obligation to Middle Eastern countries internationally unless they are self-imposed or joint efforts through the U.N. In fact, the U.S. breaks many international treaties and agreements by militarily occupying countries such as Afghanistan and Iraq, largely violating the just-war theory against terror as it does not initially respect diplomacy. Furthermore, in asserting this duty to restrain evil through force, Elshtain affirms that forgiveness and reconciliation are incongruent with justice—at least for the U.S. after 9/11—setting a dangerous precedent for future conflicts. In fact, she wholly disregards Jesus’ Good Samaritan parable in the Gospel of Luke that ultimately reveals that one’s foe can be considered their neighbor, and thus one must love them in accordance with the teachings of Jesus. Elshtain believes loving one’s neighbor is a principal Christian precept and grounds for just-war, yet contradicts herself by denying the concept of a universal humanity and responsibility to other humans. In particular, the U.S. understands this complex relationship between friend and foe better than most, as during their anti-Communist efforts against the U.S.S.R. in the Middle East during the Cold War, they funded the Taliban and other organizations that would later use those weapons against the United States. Without this belief in mutual responsibility, her argument that America has a duty to protect human rights globally lacks legitimacy and exhibits her lack of self-reflection in considering America’s precarious position in the Middle East.

Elshtain’s strong sense of patriotism permeates her writing, and her proud romanticization of America taints her logical discourse accordingly. Granted, a romantic view of one’s country does not necessarily invalidate one’s writing, but for instance she approaches the 9/11 aftermath with a steadfast—bordering on bigoted—polar view of America versus Muslim fundamentalist that emphasizes a champion and a loser, and ironically attributes the unbridled hatred she characterizes in the Muslim extremists to her own country’s ambitions.

Elshtain also fails to recognize the merits of nonviolent alternatives to war, dismissing them entirely in her proposal. It is challenging to convincingly declare that war is ever the only alternative, unless a nation is hypothetically in the midst of incessant bombings and terror and has no other way to protect its people. Not once does Elshtain consider counterterrorist efforts founded on legal proceedings of international courts or criminal pursuit of terrorists. Without this criminality and habeas corpus, the United States sets an unhealthy precedent of war in response to all national attacks or threats. Granted, in many senses it is particularly difficult to pursue the terrorists responsible for 9/11, as the U.S. does not definitively know who was responsible. These legal efforts in the Middle East could quickly become the equivalent of a war-like engagement or occupation, and thus declaring full war could be a safer method to approach the situation as it commits more personnel and resources to perform the job successfully. However, it is the policy and ideal that is at stake. Pursuit of al-Qaeda and Osama bin Laden with such vindictive zeal after 9/11 projects an image of a country whose only conception of effective foreign policy is war. Furthermore, by declaring war on terrorists like Saddam Hussein, we legitimize them and convert them into warriors rather than the criminals and murderers they are. Not only does she not assess legal pursuit of terrorists, she does not fully contemplate the causes of terrorist recruitment or any preventative measures that could be taken to avoid war, namely, decreasing poverty, unemployment, and improving health services in Middle Eastern countries. Though she briefly acknowledges the merits of these efforts, she clearly promotes war above all other alternatives, and ultimately views military intervention as the most effectual method of counterterrorism. In addition, pursuing more legal means of justice may well improve America’s international image and prevent more terrorists from joining groups such as al-Qaeda. According to numerous U.S. intelligence agencies, the war in Iraq has drastically augmented terrorist recruiting and public disregard for America. The activity of radicalized Muslim terrorists has risen tremendously from 208 attacks and 625 deaths in 2003 to 14,500 attacks and 20,000 deaths in 2007. Whether these figures are entirely representative of terrorist recruitment or not, it certainly makes coherent sense that terrorist groups would have to organize under the threat of American military efforts, and war-torn families or particularly outraged noncombatants would have sufficient motivation to join terrorist organizations.

Having established her image of anti-American Muslim terrorists, Elshtain proceeds to enumerate the various criteria for declaration of a just-war, or jus ad bellum. Elshtain contends that the American government was justified in declaring a “war against terror” and subsequent invasions of Afghanistan and later Iraq. She claims the war was justified as it sought to protect innocent American lives, used the right authority in its declaration, had a reasonable chance of success, was a last resort for the nation, and followed the accepted laws of proportionality in its implementation.

In response, it is problematic to claim that the war “protects innocent lives” as it will undoubtedly endanger noncombatants in the foreign countries. Elshtain argues the war saved lives by citing various child mortality rates before and after U.S. engagement of the Taliban. Her figures, however, largely focus on the efforts of UNICEF to eradicate measles—which is entirely unrelated to military involvement—and she ignores the possibility of medical intervention and support without military aid, another viable proposal that bypasses the need for any killing. In particular, Elshtain claims that modern precision airpower would help the U.S. limit civilian and noncombatant causalities and deaths, while also preventing disproportionate large-scale bombings. However, the first two weeks of Bush’s “strategic bombing” initiative in Iraq claimed nearly 100,000 lives, largely of women and children and other foreign noncombatants. Thus the United States quickly violated the just-war rules of proportionality. Furthermore, surgical air strikes are—at their essence—smaller-scale carpet bombings, as they merely reduce the number of noncombatants killed per strike. The concept is intrinsically inadequate in fulfilling the principle of protecting innocent lives, as it will almost invariably endanger civilians. Granted, the U.S. adhered to lawful proceedings and declaration of war domestically, but internationally they violated U.N. agreements and treaties promising to consult with the U.N. General Assembly prior to any declaration of war in the Middle East.

As to fulfilling the last resort criterion, the “war on terror” was declared by George W. Bush on September 20, 2011, nine days after the attacks of 9/11. Similarly, the war in Afghanistan began on October 7th, 2001. These timelines certainly do not allow for ample time in reflection and the U.S. did not wholeheartedly pursue other possible responses immediately following 9/11. More importantly, Elshtain begins her work by referencing Albert Camus’ novel the Plague, and effectively compares Muslim terrorists to “rats” in the city of Oran. By establishing them as subhuman, she can never fulfill her own criteria of last resort for the U.S., as there would never be any genuine effort to reason or negotiate with such a lesser group of people. This internal inconsistency in her work reveals her underlying effort to justify the war at any cost.

Similarly, how does a State evaluate a reasonable chance of success? In retrospect, the Iraq war was far longer and costlier than anyone imagined, and though one could argue the United States has not suffered another attack on the scale of 9/11, it is not a persuasive instance of causality. The difficulty with any true chance of success after 9/11 is due to the nature of the threat. A war against terrorism—or even an al-Qaeda or Taliban for that matter—is a hopeless definition, for it is unquantifiable how successful a State is against an endlessly transforming group that is predominately unassociated with any nation. The U.S. can set aside vast amounts of resources to fight in the Middle East, but it only takes one person acting alone or part of a radical religious group to terrorize a country. Ultimately, this criterion is a crucial complication of just-war theory, for in any war it is close to impossible to predict a nation’s chances of success prior to war, or qualify its success afterward. Granted, many claim World War II was a necessary war for the United States, but despite ending the Axis’ military control of Europe, the U.S. lost close to 500,000 lives and spent over 3.5 trillion dollars in modern currency. Realistically—given internal political exigencies—no State is likely to refrain from war out of low probability of success. In other words, any just-war advocate would have still supported U.S. involvement in World War II even if America had possessed one percent of the military might it had in 1941—success does not factor into the decision at all.

The concept of just-war Elshtain presents consists of many inherent problems and lacks ample examination of nonviolent approaches. She is far too reductionist in evaluating the relative merits of war compared to alternative strategies, and tends to work herself into an unreasonable “either or” situation that suggests solely military intervention without international cooperation or vice versa. In contrast, a healthy balance between the two would permit criminal pursuit of those responsible for 9/11 while addressing the causes of terrorist recruitment through economic and health-based aid organizations. Throughout her work, Elshtain’s rhetoric and tone is extensively heated, angry, and at times sarcastic in addressing counterarguments to her personal convictions. Personally, she is not reflective enough in considering the events of 9/11—both as a Christian realist and an analytical writer—and advocates retributive justice through punishment and killing rather than restorative justice, a process that can heal the victim, offender, and community affected by terrorist events.