---
title: Religious Discourse in the Public Sphere
when: 12.19.2013
---
The United States is and always has been heavily invested in religion—particularly Protestant Christianity—and thus it is unreasonable to conceive of a public contemporary atmosphere in which religious discourse does not creep into many political conversations. America has experienced both extremes of religious fervor, from uplifting progressive social movements to an unforgettable history of slavery and racial strife. The ultimate difficulty with including scriptural or spiritual justification in the political realm is that it tends to alienate many of the skeptics, atheists, or other individuals who do not accept the religion. Particularly with such an eclectic composition of heritage and religious affiliation in the U.S., one is bound to encounter a dissenting opinion on all public matters of policy. Whereas many critics assert that religion has no place in politics, other thinkers perceive the potential benefits of its inclusion within political conversations.<!--more--> However, regardless of their perspective on religious discourse in the public sphere, each critic is chiefly concerned with how to construct just laws and stable politics in a morally and ethnically diverse society. In this essay, I will consider the leading theories proposing the polar opposites from full exclusion of religion to complete involvement in politics and incorporation of religious instruction in public education. In addition, I provide my own perspective and investigate some of the underlying difficulties with rhetoric in politics. Lastly, I conclude that both parties must strive for civility and approach conversations with a certain modesty that counteracts over-conviction in one’s beliefs.

Liberal secularists propose a range of opinions that—despite varying in stringency—seek to remove religious discourse from the public sphere. Kenneth Wald and Allison Calhoun-Brown maintain that incorporating religious dialogue into American politics ultimately threatens the political stability of America. In Religion and Politics in the United States, Wald and Calhoun-Brown develop the generic personalities of fundamentalist Christians in America to encompass limited education, inability to accept doubt or challenges to their belief systems, and a lack of need to justify their outlooks to other parties. Wald and Calhoun-Brown stress that accessibility is the key to legitimate and just legal policy, and thus theological arguments are problematic as they exclude too many who do not adhere to those religious views. Furthermore, they assert that many fundamentalists lack the requisite traits to permit a worthwhile two-way conversation on religious opinions. One must recognize, however, that religious bigotry is particularly detested by secular liberalists such as Wald and Calhoun-Brown, and thus their personal views permeate their writing to an extent. As an alternative, they suggest a translation of religious language into secular arguments. This method—though they cite Martin Luther King, Jr. as a prime exemplar—is simply too vague and undefined to function. One cannot expect these translations to entirely satisfy the theological and secular requirements for public conversation.

On the other hand, John Rawls contends that a form of neutrality must instead be instated that permits private religious belief, but emphasizes the use of a public reason in politics and public affairs. Rawls begins by opining on human nature, claiming that people possess a wide variety of conceptions of a “good life,” which he calls comprehensive doctrines. Differing life events and backgrounds make it difficult to resolve this diversity, and thus individuals in a pluralistic society must strive to use their public reason, a non-religious rationalization that one can expect others to support if valid. Unfortunately, similar to Wald and Calhoun-Brown’s “translated language,” this proposal lacks persuasion, as no form of rhetoric will surely resonate with all people, despite its apparent legitimacy. Nonetheless, assuming humans possess this innate political conception of justice, Rawls promotes an extensive separation of Church and State in his theory. Furthermore, he affirms that a God-like figure is nonessential for a fully functioning society or for understanding the implementation of justice. However, in developing his theory, Rawls undoubtedly alienates many readers who view his proposal as blasphemy and hubris, as it ostensibly dismisses the need for any divine being to define justice for its followers. On the contrary, he is not at all suggesting a complete removal of religion and actually permits the inclusion of theological reasoning. However, it must be substantiated appropriately by some instance of public reason to claim authenticity.

Rawls describes a society—often termed a “procedural republic”—founded on neutrality between comprehensive doctrines in which the State does not endorse any particular moral views. Acknowledging the susceptibility of humans to indulge their underlying morals convictions, Rawls asserts that each member of society must employ a veil of ignorance that prevents one from knowing their own race, social status, gender, religion, or other defining characteristics in order to preempt discrimination. Rawls’ proposal significantly influenced the operations and methodology of the Supreme Court in the last 50 years, and many continue to support his political philosophy today. Nonetheless, there are important counterarguments to consider against his proposition, particularly in regard to its applicability and feasibility.

In reaction to Rawls’ procedural republic founded on public reason, many political philosophers challenge the probability of neutrality and the possibility of its successful implementation in society. In Michael Sandel’s book Liberalism and the Limits of Justice, he begins his argument against Rawls by accepting the theory of neutrality. However, he proceeds to suggest various instances in which the government demonstrates its inability to preserve neutrality politically and legally. To begin, Sandel scrutinizes no-fault divorce, which is essentially a legal right that allows for a spouse to unilaterally file for divorce without requiring religious or moral justification of any wrongdoing. Sandel asserts that this legal right violates many traditional beliefs about the sanctity of marriage and the roles of family members. In addition, the principle presents greater economic and social burdens to the mother in the relationship than the father, and thus arguably lacks a form of equality in practice. However, Sandel’s predominant argument is that the law illustrates political support of a “liberal conception of persons as unencumbered selves independent of their roles and unbounded by moral ties they choose to reject.” He believes this outlook leads towards a capitalist driven individual who rejects others and does not realize the potential benefit of relationships with others.

Ironically, Sandel is unwittingly proving his own point here regarding people’s incapability to remain neutral. Granted, the liberal conception of self differs from what Sandel would describe as “traditional” norms—which already possesses a troubling ambiguity—yet is not obviously a comprehensive doctrine resulting from no-fault divorce as he makes it out to be. Because Sandel morally supports the notion of human interdependency, he puts forth the liberal self as a necessary adverse outcome of no-fault divorce, and fails to realize the two are not necessarily mutually dependent. Consequently, Sandel is demonstrating an inability—shared by many others—to maintain fully neutral while employing his own political rhetoric.

Sandel also presents Roe v. Wade as an instance of biased legal proceedings in the Supreme Court. In the 1973 decision, the court modified the initial claim that life begins at conception and instead maintained that life begins at viability. Although they stated that they pursued purely legal justification and were not commenting on the morals of abortion, it was clear they were not entirely impartial in their decision. Sandel argues Rawls’ requisite neutrality is not only absent from the written law, but is similarly nonexistent in the legal justifications. Moreover, Sandel suggests that this ruling continues to support a view of an unencumbered self that is fully independent. In other words, through abortion both men and women have the ability to live separate, unconstrained lives without the duty of parenthood. In contrast to his claims against no-fault divorce, Sandel presents a much more compelling argument here as the law clearly contains significant moral implications. Many argue that—although flawed—Rawls provides the best approach, despite its inability for complete realistic actualization. In addition, ignoring the unfortunate and unequal repercussions of no-fault divorce, the law itself is just and equitable literally. Whether or not one is a proponent of Rawls or Wald and Calhoun-Brown one must also consider the alternatives to secular theory, namely, a controlled inclusion of religion in the public sphere.

Political philosophers such as Sonia Sikka hold that there are worthwhile advantages to incorporating religious discourse in the public sphere, and potentially in public education as well. Sikka agrees with many of Sandel’s assertions, but ultimately goes further by proposing her own theory of just political life. Initially, Sikka points out that as comprehensive doctrines and morals are methodically removed from the public sphere, arguments become increasingly vapid and unsubstantial. Furthermore, it limits one’s ability for substantive reasoning, which is an individual’s ability to dynamically reflect on his or her own moral and political beliefs. If one is not allowed to present their private moral or religious views in the public sphere and subject them to a form of higher criticism, they do not feel compelled to defend the veracity of those convictions, and thus Rawls’ neutrality would precipitate religious extremism and fundamentalism.

Sikka also focuses on the importance of multiculturalism in America, particularly in claiming that certain religious and cultural groups promote substantive reasoning and strive for justice through advocacy of rights. Sikka hints at a paradox that she does not focus on, but is vital to consider when evaluating just practices. If the government passes legislation in favor of homosexual rights and privileges, for instance, do they simultaneously become less tolerant of those opposed to the concept? Although the justification derives from law and is ideally devoid of moral reasoning, the passage of the law inevitably determines a moral stance for the government. Therefore, it is essentially impossible for the government to legislate neutrally on moral matters associated with private life, as it will undoubtedly reject one group’s perspective. This notion supports Sandel’s assertion that Roe v. Wade lacked neutral deliberation.

In addition to fully incorporating religious discourse into the public sphere, Sikka supports its inclusion in public education to foster the ability for calm and considerate religious debate. Unfortunately, this final proposition lacks practicality, as it would be nearly impossible to effectively introduce religion into school curriculum without some form of bias or impartiality. Furthermore, just as American education saw severe evangelical opposition with its introduction of evolutionary science in the mid 20th century, religious curriculum would be equally, if not more, challenging to integrate successfully.

In addressing the two opposing theories regarding religious rhetoric in the public sphere, one encounters many related fundamental complications with both theories. Both Rawls’ and Sikka’s theories function on a presumption of idealism. Rawls’ expectation of neutrality is more hopeful than realistically attainable, as his veil of ignorance suggests that even he did not imagine a perfect form of equity in society. Likewise, Sikka asserts that bringing religion into the public sphere offers numerous benefits, but subtly admits that she is uncertain of all the ramifications. From a more psychological perspective, it is preposterous to assume that in such a pluralist environment as the United States people will be able to hold unbiased opinions during deeply personal arguments in public life. Some insist that the Founders established the first amendment in recognition of this basic conflict, and thus sought to permit people to engage freely in conversation.

To an extent, allowing religious discourse does help combat the comprehensive doctrine of an unencumbered, hyperindividualized self that some liberals and conservatives fear, as Christianity in its essence often supports the concept of mutual dependency and validation through meaningful interpersonal relationships. However, despite these values, the prospect of civil engagement involving religion appears unpromising. The most prominent and convincing argument against religious discourse in politics is that simply too many individuals are alienated by religious language and reasoning. If one does not attribute value to a divine figure or belief system, how can they effectively rationalize another person’s theological argument? At the same time, secular theory possesses its own set of difficulties. Although many secular liberals fail to acknowledge it while denouncing theological arguments, secular reasoning is equally as filled with controversy and divergence of thought. Additionally, Rawls’ theory—one of the most popular modern secular proposals for a just society—encourages a form of dishonesty and duplicity that prevents either party from revealing what they truly believe about the topic.

Thus one arrives at an imperfect solution in which neither secular nor theological language promotes respectful and meaningful conversation. Ultimately, the critical complication arises from the nature of an argument. One must assess whether reason is disparate from power. For at the root of any form of rhetoric is an inherent problem with civility: a debate is an instance of language fueled by self-interest. Thus each party is continuously attempting to persuade the other to emend or entirely alter their point. Furthermore, the entire epistemology of humanist or Enlightenment reason arose in a contest of power and therefore has an uncertain status. I must acknowledge the inability of one paper to adequately address all reflections on this debate, as politics is dynamic by virtue and constantly transforming. However, from my limited analysis, I recognize a necessity to approach public conversations regarding both secular and religious content with an ideal of civility and respect. A conscious effort must be made by both parties to listen with open minds and maintain a relative modesty in asserting their opinions. In doing so, we furnish meaningful and validating relationships with others, all the while broadening our own moral and political convictions.