---
title: The Postwar Rise of Evangelicalism
when: 11.13.2013
---
In a time of growing conviction in secularization and modernization theory, the revival of evangelical Christianity in America in the 1960s was almost entirely unforeseen. Prior to the First World War, evangelists played an extensive role in American political life and policy. During the Progressive Era, evangelicals led a vast number of political programs such as women’s suffrage, business and monopoly regulation, currency reform, the referendum process and more. Thus, the rapid reemergence of evangelicals in American politics and life in the sixties came as a serious shock to most. In this essay, I will delineate the most prominent movements and events in the revival of evangelical Christianity in the late twentieth century, starting from the late 1950s onward. After understanding the chronology of the mobilization, I will discuss some of the leading theories and hypotheses for this religious renaissance. In doing so, it is essential to note some of the counterarguments and caveats with certain political theories, for even the most celebrated political historians carry their own prejudices and agendas in their work.<!--more-->

The revival of evangelical Christianity in the United States during the 1950s arose from a timely composite of both political and economic circumstances. In 1957, the U.S.S.R. launched Sputnik 1, a low-earth orbiting satellite that launched America and the Soviet Union into the Space Race, a component of the Cold War that saw tremendous innovation and development in American technology and defense development. The evangelical movement was largely tied to the Cold War, for the fear of a more powerful global superpower struck fear into many Americans and precipitated an increase in science education and defense spending—surpassing the already enormous standard after World War II. The postwar economic expansion in the automobile, petroleum, rubber, and food processing sectors was particularly felt in southern California, a migration center for many 1950s evangelicals. The military budget, however, was the true key to southern California’s commercial surge, with roughly 40 percent of the region’s manufacturing related to defense contracts. This expenditure fueled thousands of new jobs, and by the mid 1950s approximately 1,000 people were migrating to California every day, with the largest percentages coming from the south where white evangelicals were most heavily concentrated. According to many historians, this migration was at the heart of evangelicals’ eventual mobilization. The liberal nature of southern California at the time combined with increases in freedom of sexuality, counterculture, and war protests deeply repulsed the recently settled white southern evangelicals and prompted a strong reactionary movement—often referred to as “backlash” theory—from these evangelicals against the purportedly deteriorating moral standards of modern American culture. Just as their ancestors had crusaded against alcohol consumption, evolution, and sexual promiscuity, the southern Californian evangelicals—along with countless others across the nation—saw each movement and protest as a defense of their values of Christianity and white customs. Therefore, parents and concerned individuals—along with their churches—made it their responsibility to use the same fervor previously reserved for religious conversion in public policy and the social sphere. The backlash theory is generally accepted as the most popular theory of evangelical reemergence in the latter half of the twentieth century, but many historians and political scientists challenge its claims. To some, it is improbable that a purely emotional and social reaction could provoke such vast political involvement and campaigning. Granted, the idea of a religious revival solely due to a social backlash lacks influence. However, considering the theory with the rising economic status of many evangelists and their general growing interest in politics and promoting certain moral values gives greater credence to the theory.

In the election of 1960, John F. Kennedy’s Catholic values spawned a crucial political shift of evangelical Americans from the Democratic to the Republican Party. The Republicans had lost the last six out of eight presidential elections from 1932 to 1960, and saw this reversal as an opportunity to enlarge their audience and garner more support. The movement also ensued from the increasing liberalism of the Democratic Party on race and social welfare. The evangelicals had previously associated with the Democratic Party for its responsibility in reestablishing white dominance at the turn of the twentieth century, passage of the Jim Crow laws, and New Deal plans that helped many poor white agricultural families during the depression. In fact, white southern evangelicals last contributed a net partisan advantage to the Democratic Party in 1965.

A series of events in the 1970s, culminating with the election of Jimmy Carter in 1976, illustrate the rapid and energized establishment of the New Christian Right in America. In the mid 1970s in Kanawha County, West Virginia, conservative school board members and concerned parents erupted into vehement protests against the addition of new school textbooks that allegedly challenged accepted religious beliefs with science and corrupted the minds of the youth. The movement instantly amassed support and conservative parents and some teachers boycotted schools in an effort to influence the school board. The effort inspired many similar campaigns across the country, despite the fact that the school board eventually approved the use of the textbooks in Kanawha County.

During the 1970s, many gender equality advocates supported the Equal Right Amendment (ERA) to the Constitution in an effort to legally protect gender equity in America. Conservative churches—and ironically the compelling and successful efforts of female-dominated groups such as Concerned Women for America—played a vital role in mobilizing evangelical Christian conservatives to protest and become active in the resistance movement. Membership in fundamentalist churches and general high church attendance directly corresponded with those in opposition to passage of the amendment. The movement ultimately died three states short of ratification. 

It was evident by the election of Jimmy Carter in 1976 that Democrats had lost the majority of white southern support. Carter was a southern Baptist who served in the U.S. Navy for many years and possessed a graduate education in reactor technology and nuclear physics. He represented a pleasant contradiction to the common prejudicial conception of a bigoted and racist southern Baptist with his moderate politics and union between religion and science. Carter signified a crucial shift in the previous adherence of southern Baptists to the Democratic party, and ushered in a novel Christian Right party that associated heavily with conservative Republicans.

By the 1979 rise of the Moral Majority and the election of Ronald Reagan a year later, the New Christian Right had decidedly affixed itself to the Republican Party. Founded by southern evangelical pastor Jerry Falwell, the Moral Majority was an organization that sought to improve moral values of American culture and society. Reagan, along with the members of his party, supported many evangelical’s agendas, namely: legalization of prayer in schools, a proposed amendment prohibiting abortion, and opposition to the ERA. Furthermore, by this time it was essentially a regular occurrence for popular religious leaders to speak at GOP conventions and events.

Although the backlash theory of the mobilization of postwar evangelicals remains most popular, modern political historians present a diversified range of hypotheses. Joseph Gusfield, along with Wald and Calhoun-Brown, assert that evangelicals wanted to reinstate their political dominance and persuasion in moral matters in America: “[each evangelical] seeks public acts through which he may reaffirm the dominance and prestige of his style of life.”  They effectively reduce the movement of evangelicals to an egotistical motivation in tune with Hegel’s master-slave dialectic, which states one has an intricate relationship with others, incessantly struggling to achieve superiority, all the while needing their inferior to acknowledge and validate them. However, Wald and Calhoun-Brown are erroneous in assuming all evangelicals fit under one identity and set of values: “through early training and later participation in group life, evangelicals are exposed to a culture that emphasizes adherence to traditional norms, respect for family and religious authority, asceticism, and control of impulse.” 4 It is unreasonable for Wald and Calhoun-Brown to assume all evangelicals carry precisely the same beliefs. When dealing with indistinct demographics and groups of people—which a vague term like “evangelicals” suggests—it is easy to unwittingly succumb to stereotypes and thus over-generalize. Wald and Calhoun-Brown’s own perceptions and moral conceptions creep into their writing through these instances, and they stray from their overall analytical and historical approach to the postwar rise of the evangelicals in America.

Other theorists, such as Axel Schäfer, claim evangelicals did not react on grounds of moral effrontery, but instead government donations and spending supported many religious groups. Schäfer asserts these religious organizations, with vague or unknown political ties to the federal government, were able to receive public funds while remaining independent and continuing to practice their own particular sect of Christianity. For instance, the controversial “charitable choice” provision of 1996 denies discrimination against nonprofit religious organizations in government contracting, assumes a liberal stance with many previous tax exemptions and IRS codes, and permits the display of religious iconography where government services are provided. Schäfer’s hypothesis is certainly reasonable when considering his general evidence such as charitable choice and Bush’s later “faith-based initiative,” but ultimately lacks persuasion because of its pure conjectural nature. It is nearly impossible to prove these assertions without extensive economic research, and even then the government has publicly approved these organizations and programs through law despite vehement opposition from those wary of a denominational central government.

The rapid rise and mobilization of evangelical Christians after World War II undoubtedly was a varied amalgam of political and economic factors. Although not the focus of this essay, the theory proposed by Schäfer interestingly delegitimizes most other historians’ debates about backlash theory and asserts that separation of Church and state is simply a myth in postwar America. Therefore, Supreme Court decisions and legal rulings on controversial matters would contain little significance, and instead donations made to politically active religious groups like the National Association of Evangelicals would be the chief contributors to their mobilization in the postwar period. Other historians continuously try to reduce the movement to its essence and strip away possibly superfluous evidence, but it is vital to understand that history cannot be marginalized beyond a certain extent. A complete consideration of all influences is integral to a comprehensive narrative and analysis.