---
title: Considering the Coherence of Descartes' _Cogito_ Argument
when: 10.31.2014
---
In _Meditationes de prima philosophia_ (1641), René Descartes presents six meditations in which he attempts to set forth exactly what can and cannot be known with absolute certainty in life. As a whole, the meditations establish and clarify Descartes’ metaphysical beliefs that were set forth in his Discourse on Method in 1637. In particular, the first and second meditations present one of Descartes most influential and famous proposals, the cogito, which asserts that cognition and thought are essentially equivalent to existence. Within these first two meditations, Descartes arrives at his cogito by proposing a thought experiment that centers around a deceptive and malicious “demon” who intends to obscure everything perceived in the natural world and within the Descartes’ mind. By employing this hypothetical demon in his argument, Descartes arrives at the ultimate conclusion that he must be a “thinking thing.” Although many consider the _Cogito_ to be one of the most significant notions in Western Philosophy, the argument itself possess inconsistencies and a lack of clarity in pivotal aspects of the explanation.<!--more--> For the most part, the argument presented is valid, as the truth of the premises necessitate a conclusion closely related to—if not identical to—that of Descartes’. However, the argument lacks soundness, as Descartes’ rhetorical device of an “evil demon” does not adhere to his own criteria for skepticism. To reveal these subtleties in the argument, I will first provide the motivation for Descartes’ meditations along with a scrupulous consideration of the thought experiment. In addition, I will consider what characteristics and attributes one can assign to this newly derived “thinking thing,” and finally examine the most compelling counterarguments to Descartes’ experiment and subsequent conclusion.

Descartes commences his Meditations with the desire to rid himself entirely of previous opinions and ostensible knowledge so that he may establish a firm and indisputable basis for the sciences. Whereas Aristotle proposed that all knowledge could be gained through the senses alone, Descartes develops a novel and revolutionary conception of knowledge and reason that breaks away from the long-held notions of Aristotelian philosophy. Descartes wishes to withdraw from his senses and rid himself of all prejudices they may bring about the outside world. His argument is clearly optimistic from the start, as he desires to eventually build back up most of his previous beliefs through incontrovertible logic and development. In his first meditation, Descartes acknowledges that iteratively considering every opinion—which is either a composite of more basic beliefs or a basic belief itself—is an impossible task, and so he decides to evaluate the underlying foundations of all his beliefs: “… I need not take on the endless task of running through my beliefs one by one: since a building collapses when its foundation is cut out from under it, I will go straight to the principles on which all my former beliefs rested” (136). Moreover, to reject any given belief, Descartes claims he need only find one shred of doubt to entirely dismiss the belief (136). The suggestion that some ideas are more fundamental than others constitutes a theory called foundationalism, which maintains that the most basic beliefs rest at the bottom of a metaphorical structure of knowledge, and all other composite beliefs rest upon that foundation. Therefore, if Descartes can find grounds for doubt in one of the most basic premises, all composite beliefs that rest on top of the premise are also dubitable and thus must be rejected by his own criteria. Descartes conceives of knowledge as the presence of true, justified belief. Knowledge, then, is the absence of all doubt in a particular subject, but it must undergo a stringent process of justification. For example, one may guess correctly that a bag of marbles contains exactly 34 balls in it without any prior observation or information. However, this is only true belief as opposed to true, justified belief, for the individual had no logical rationale for deciding on that value. Descartes develops a methodology, frequently called Cartesian Skepticism, which asserts that people must necessarily reject any opinions that possess uncertainty and in doing so are able to consolidate their knowledge into only that which is absolutely certain.

Within the first meditation, Descartes begins by considering how various instances of the senses can be extremely misleading and thus present reason for doubt. For instance, an oar in the water appears to bend in certain circumstances, but, in fact, the refraction of light through the two mediums of air and water modify the speed of light and bend the light waves as they exit the water. Likewise, Descartes realizes that dreams can be extremely lucid and realistic and thus questions how anyone is able to claim beyond a reasonable doubt whether they are currently dreaming or in a waking state. It is unclear whether Descartes intends to claim that both reality and dream-states exist but one simply cannot accurately distinguish between the two, or whether he intends to propose a state of universal and perpetual dreaming in which there may be no waking state at all. The latter suggests that all sensory input is always inaccurate and untrustworthy, but the former permits that one’s sensory input could be faithful under certain circumstances. This ambiguity of language, along with others later in his first two meditations, is an ongoing problem that leaves the reader unclear as to what they may or may not rightly assume. In the development of a complex and revolutionary text such as Descartes’ Meditations, it is crucial that he provide more elucidation in these key areas of the text.

In contrast to these examples which illustrate the inauthenticity of the senses, Descartes goes on to declare that certain non-composite subjects that are particularly basic are irrefutable and can remain absolute, such as arithmetic, geometry, and propositional logic: “Whether we are awake or asleep, two plus three is always five, and the square never has more than four sides. It seems impossible even to suspect such obvious truths of falsity” (137). Nonetheless, he recognizes that a powerful being could have misled him to believe these ostensibly innate and basic beliefs he holds to be true, so he must in turn reject these as well. According to Descartes, this being cannot be a God—in the sense of an Abrahamic deity—as that would necessitate an omnipotent, omni-benevolent, and omniscient power that would never intentionally mislead humankind (138). Therefore, Descartes labels this being as an evil demon that actively and malevolently intends to obfuscate the truth: “I will suppose, then, not that Deity, who is sovereignly good and the fountain of truth, but that some malignant demon, who is at once exceedingly potent and deceitful, has employed all his artifice to deceive me…” (138). By intentionally remaining skeptical of everything, Descartes is assured that he will not be unwittingly misled in the pursuit of truth. Throughout meditation one, it is important to identify the underlying prejudice engrained in Descartes own writing, namely, his undeservedly brief consideration of the non-existence of God followed by his declaration that “there is a supremely good God who is the source of all truth…” (138). Descartes was a considered by many historians to be a devout Catholic, and was certainly molded by the Roman Inquisition of 1615 and the Catholic condemnation and trial of Galileo in 1633. Both events would have demonstrated to Descartes the unbridled power of the Church and mandated a cautious approach that he ought to employ when openly commenting on Catholic doctrine. In summary, meditation one strongly challenges the accepted notion of rationality, for Descartes claims that with any amount of doubt, one can never be certain. Without a methodical evaluation of one’s basic beliefs, Descartes asserts that nothing can be known. This technique sets the stage for the second meditation in which he eventually discovers an undeniable and basic quality of human nature: intellect.

At the start of his second meditation, Descartes recalls the claim of the Greek mathematician and physicist Archimedes, who claimed he could shift the world given one immovable point. Similarly, Descartes seeks one pivotal axiom or indisputably basic belief upon which to rebuild his intuition about the world around him. As in meditation one, he must reject his senses, bodily form, and any other properties that he previously held as innate (138). Acknowledging the non-existence of these properties, Descartes wonders whether he can claim that he himself doesn’t exist. He states that in order to doubt his being he must in fact exist, a claim that is reminiscent of Augustine’s dubito ergo sum (“I doubt, therefore I am”). More importantly, the concept of deception raised in the previous thought experiment requires both a deceiver and a party that is deceived. In this case, that latter party is Descartes, and the malicious demon is the deceiver. Even if he is not certain of anything—either due to his own doubt or the tampering of the demon—he himself is still deceived and thus must exist: “Then surely I exist, since I am deceived. Let him deceive me all he can, he will never make it the case that I am nothing while I think that I am something” (139). Descartes proposes an equivalence relation between thought and existence. In other words, Descartes exists if and only if he thinks. By the laws of equivalence, if Descartes thinks, then he must necessarily exist. Conversely, if Descartes exists, then he must necessarily be thinking. He arrives at this notion of existence purely from intellection and introspection, rather than by making use of potentially skewed and inaccurate mental images of the world. This a priori approach constitutes the rationalist approach to knowledge that differs entirely from the empirical approach to knowledge from philosophers such as Hume, Locke, and Berkeley. Eventually, Descartes expands the definition of this cognitive being to include “Something that doubts, understands, affirms, denies, wills, refuses—and also imagines and senses” (140). Although the senses are dubitable and untrustworthy, they are still a veridical part of his being. Having established this redefinition, Descartes then wonders what qualities can one can incontrovertibly attribute to this newly discovered “thinking thing,” or res cogitans, as originally denoted in the Latin text. It is important to notice Descartes initially claims that “[he is]…only a thinking thing,” and does not clarify whether he means that he can only think and nothing more, or whether—in addition to other qualities—he is at minimum a thinking being (140). Similarly, it is unclear what Descartes means exactly by a “thing.” This equivocal term most likely refers to his ontological definition of substance dualism, or Cartesian dualism, which contends that humans are composed of both a thinking thing (res cogitans) and an extended form (res extensa). However, these subtle imprecisions in the text leave the reader uncertain of Descartes’ true motivation and message. 
Descartes proceeds by further explicating the rationalist approach to knowledge by considering the mutation of a piece of wax from solid state to liquid state in the presence of external heat. He claims that one cannot “know” the wax purely from the senses because when one places it by the fire it changes form and all the sensory details previously attributed to the solid state disappear (141). Nonetheless, one still considers it the same piece of wax. In addition, one cannot arrive at this piece of knowledge from imagination, as there are infinitely many possibilities they would have to recognize, and one slight inaccuracy would prevent one from recognizing the same piece of wax. Instead, Descartes insists that knowledge of the wax is reached through intellection alone without any reliance on sensory input (141). However, Descartes’ assertion that the wax is known purely through intellection lacks a coherent framework. First, a chemist or empiricist would argue that wax is not simply defined as one rigid state with certain unwavering attributes. Instead, it is a chemical hydrocarbon of the form CnH2n+2 that can exist in solid, liquid, gaseous, and superplasma states. Therefore, one could objectively determine the chemical formula in each instance, its mass and extension, and other quantitative measurements in order to claim with almost certainty that it is the same piece of wax. Granted, a rationalist would contend that these observations are simply a form of sophisticated sensory input, and thus grounds for doubt and inaccuracy. However, Descartes’ declaration that the wax can be known through intellection lacks cogency, as an initial observation of the wax by the rationalist requires sight and thus sensory input. If Descartes has previously ruled out the veracity of the senses, then both parties are incapable of making any such claims of either existence or equivalence. 
In developing the res cogitans, Descartes also asserts that the mind must necessarily be known better than the body. According to Descartes, even if the wax is an illusion or non-existent artifact, any consideration simply reaffirms that he exists in that moment. This argument, however, is problematic in both clarity and justification. If he means to say that the existence of the mind is better known than the existence of the body, then this would be true, for any thought process—despite whether or not it is accurate knowledge—reinforces the existence of the res cogitans. On the other hand, it is more likely that Descartes intends to state that, in a vague quantifiable sense, he knows more about his mind than his body. This argument would be true if and only if every instance of intellect contributed a non-negative addition to the existing knowledge set that he previously possessed regarding his mind. That is, he would have to allege that he had learned “one more unique concept” about the mind every time he thought in order to quantifiably have more knowledge of the mind than the body. However, the cogito only holds that thought and being are equivalent, which is just a statement of existence and not of supplemental knowledge. The reaffirmation of existence is the same information and thus nothing new is gained. In review of meditation two, Descartes maintains that he is a thinking thing capable of perception and understanding, that clear and accurate perceptions arise from intellect alone and not from sensory input, and that he exists as long as he thinks. It is important to note that many of these new developments possess serious ambiguities and inconsistencies, some of which have already been exposed, that ultimately destroy the soundness of Descartes’ evil demon argument.

In addition to possessing many troubling ambiguities throughout, Descartes’ argument in meditations one and two lacks soundness as the premise of the evil demon falls short of his own criteria for Cartesian skepticism. Although Descartes gives many legitimate instances of sensory deception inherent in daily life, his examples expose a contradictory notion regarding the possibility of deceit. In order to determine that one was deceived, it is necessary to know the truth and be able to realize a previous belief was not equivalent to that truth. Essentially, one would require the capacity to determine was what correct and what was incorrect. However, in doing so, they would be able to entirely avoid this deception, as they would already know that what they are experiencing is misleading. This view suggests that one need only be extremely cautious when considering whether sensory input is indicative of the true physics of experience. More importantly, the notion of the malevolent demon contradicts Descartes’ own methodology. To recall, Descartes claims that anything that can rightly be doubted must be dismissed and cannot be used as a basic belief on which to build composite beliefs. However, Descartes assumes that there is some malignant demon that obscures all his beliefs and uses this hypothetical as the crux of his later argument. By Descartes’ own method, one can legitimately claim that there might not be such a demon, and thus the notion of the demon must be rejected and cannot be used as a basic belief for subsequently concluding that if he is deceived then he must exist. Instead, had Descartes provided persuasive and plausible evidence for why such a demon must exist, then it would have been both a valid and sound argument, because this assertion of an evil demon would have been rightly substantiated. As to the general validity of his argument, it is difficult to claim that the evolution of Descartes’ reasoning necessarily requires arriving at the cogito, for it is a complex argument and, in the hands of another philosopher, could have lead to different conclusion. Nonetheless, it is more critical to recognize the inconsistencies and unaddressed, imprecise notions that Descartes leaves throughout the first two meditations. With this in mind, one must also realize the weight and consequence of the Meditations, for they were responsible for an incredible paradigm shift in the way philosophers approached the notion of knowledge. Descartes ultimately proposed that all of science ought to follow a demonstrative form of reasoning in which logical deductions are made from self-evident and axiomatic truths, instead of from sensory observations and experimentation.