---
title: Assessing Alvin Plantinga's Free Will Defense
when: 12.05.2014
---
Regardless of one’s religious beliefs, it is nearly impossible to deny that there exists a considerable amount of evil in the world. From the pain of a debilitating disease to the natural disasters that destroy entire cities to the genocides of entire races, there seems to be no shortage of suffering on Earth. In considering why these events occur, theists often question how a God could permit such senseless atrocities to occur. Alternatively, many atheists attempt to use the existence of evil and widespread misery to formulate an argument against the existence of God. Within the second half of the twentieth century, atheologians asserted with renewed vigor that the existence of evil led to a logical inconsistency with the existence of God, commonly referred to as the problem of evil. In Evil and Omnipotence, Australian philosopher J.L. Mackie seeks to disprove the existence of God not by rejecting claims made by theists with his own unrelated propositions, but instead by using their own axioms to arrive at a logical contradiction. The Abrahamic religions of Christianity, Islam, and Judaism more or less believe in a monotheistic God figure who must simultaneously possess all three of the subsequent qualities: omnipotence, omniscience, and omnibenevolence. <!--more-->Through God’s omniscience he necessarily realizes there is evil in the world, through his omnibenevolence he necessarily desires to improve the lives of the human race as much as possible, and through his omnipotence he is unconstrained in his fulfillment of his desire to eradicate evil. In addition, Mackie includes two additional propositions—though they will later become the subjects of contention—to validate his claim of logical inconsistency. First, Mackie argues that good is opposed to evil, and that a “good thing” always eliminates evil as far as it can. Secondly, he contends that there are no limits whatsoever to what an omnipotent being can do (Mackie 201). Once one has recognized this logical contradiction proposed by Mackie, they may only either deny that God exists—which is the conclusion Mackie himself propounds—or deny that evil exists as we know it or attempt to reconcile the existence of God with the existence of evil.

In response, one may reasonably ask: can evil be necessary in serving a greater good? Seventeenth century polymath Gottfried Leibniz pursues a similar argument in his 1710 work Théodicée, in which he concludes that humans must live in the “best of all possible worlds.” Leibniz believed that God serves as a sort of optimizing decision-maker. God is capable of surveying all the possible worlds through his omniscience, and through his power and good will must choose the best possible choice among the options for the human race (Leibniz 183). In a sample evaluation of these possible worlds, consider, for instance, the human quality of bravery. Most humans would likely accept that a world with more courage is better than a world lacking courage. However, a world with no evil contains no courage, as there is no risk of self-harm for the good of others without evil. Thus Leibniz would maintain that evil brings out the quality of courage in humans, and God intentionally included evil to elicit courage (Leibniz 185). In a similar sense, although the transient pain from a medical operation may appear cruel and unbearable, it is a necessary for the greater good of one’s health. Although Leibniz does not directly address the problem of evil in the same way Mackie does, one could develop Leibniz’s argument further and attempt to show that the best possible world would necessarily contain this notion of a greater good. If coherent, the argument would serve as a legitimate reconciliation between the existence of God and the existence of evil, for God must have acted in his benevolence to create the greatest world imaginable for humans.

In Evil and Omnipotence, Mackie addresses these proposals for reconciliation after exposing the logical inconsistency regarding the existence of both God and evil. Mackie denies Leibniz’s assertion that evil may be a necessary counterpart to good, as it places restraints on the omnipotence of God through causal laws, which is not allowed by definition (Mackie 203). In making this claim, however, Mackie assumes that an omnipotent being must be entirely unlimited, which remains a controversial claim among theologians. Realizing this, he additionally contemplates the Paradox of Omnipotence, which reveals an inconsistency in declaring any being as omnipotent in the sense of unbridled power (Mackie 210). Essentially, if someone claims an omnipotent being is capable of formulating laws and rules that bind itself, then the being is no longer omnipotent by definition, as it has developed obvious restraints on its own power. Conversely, if someone maintains that this being is incapable of creating rules that bind itself, then there are clearly limits to the extend of the being’s power and it is not entirely omnipotent. In Théodicée, Leibniz introduces the notion of a theodicy, which is an attempt to determine God’s actual reasoning for permitting evil in the world. In contrast, American philosopher Alvin Plantinga employs a defense in refuting Mackie’s problem of evil, which does not seek to locate the reasons for evil in the world, but instead develops a new proposition that shows how both evil and God can coexist without logical contradiction. Importantly, this new proposition need not be necessarily true; it must be logically valid and therefore merely possible. In using a defense instead of a theodicy, Plantinga eliminates the burden of proof, and instead need only demonstrate that it is possible that an omnibenevolent, omnipotent, and omniscient God created a world that contained both good and evil. Plantinga cleverly uses the precise laws of propositional logic to refute Mackie’s claim of inconsistency without ever actually having to address the will of God in a theological manner.

In God, Freedom, and Evil, Plantinga commences by revealing the logical errors within Evil and Omnipotence, and subsequently attempts to salvage Mackie’s argument by augmenting the original set of propositions. Plantinga first evaluates the possible ways Mackie’s set of propositions could be contradictory (Plantinga 12). It is clearly not explicitly contradictory, as it contains no two propositions in the set such as: {… , A,¬A}. He then considers whether it could be formally contradictory. For a set to be formally contradictory, one must be able to produce a new proposition p strictly from the propositions given such that p can be added to the set and produce an explicit contradiction. As an example, consider the set S = {B,B=>A,¬A}. By the modus ponens we can produce A from B, (B=>A). If we add A back to our original set (S∪{A}) we get a new set H = S∪{A} = {B,B=>A,¬A,A} which is explicitly contradictory. Plantinga realizes that Mackie cannot mean that his set of propositions is formally contradictory, as the laws of logic do not allow one to construct such a proposition p such that upon its reunion with the original set S exposes an explicit contradiction (Plantinga 14). It may, however, be implicitly contradictory, and Plantinga ultimately believes Mackie’s reasoning is incomplete without the inclusion of some necessarily true proposition. A set of propositions S is implicitly contradictory if there exists some necessarily true proposition p such that its inclusion with set S (S∪{p}) results in a formally contradictory set. This additional proposition p cannot be false in any way. An example of such a proposition is 2 + 2 = 4 or “a triangle has three sides.” The two necessarily true propositions that Mackie includes, qualifying them as “quasi-logical rules,” are:
1. Good is opposed to evil, and a good thing always eliminates evil as far as it can
2. There are no limits whatsoever to what an omnipotent being can do       (Mackie 201)
Plantinga takes up former more aggressively the latter, and considers various counterexamples to the assertion, iteratively refining and adding to the proposition (1). Eventually, he revises (1) to (1a): “Good is opposed to evil, and a good being eliminates every evil E that it knows about and that it can properly eliminate without either bringing about a greater evil or eliminating a good state of affairs that outweighs E” (Plantinga 20). However, this redaction is not necessarily true. To see this, imagine the situation in which person A must choose between saving two different people’s lives. You can only properly eliminate one of the evils that is bound to occur, but you physically cannot eliminate both of the evils. At the same time, nobody would blame person A for having to choose only one, and thus person A remains a “good thing” without actually fulfilling the criteria of (1a). Ultimately, Plantinga gives up the search for this necessarily true proposition p that would make Mackie’s claim of inconsistency legitimate, and instead proposes his own defense that reconciles the existence of evil with the existence of God. 
In his Free Will Defense, Plantinga demonstrates that it is merely possible that an omnipotent God could have created a world in which there was both moral good and moral evil. In presenting his defense, Plantinga accepts the notion of libertarianism and rejects the compatibilist notion of freedom—the belief that God could directly cause humans to do only good without simultaneously compromising their free will:
>A world containing creatures who are significantly free (and freely perform more good than evil actions) is more valuable, all else being equal, than a world containing no free creatures at all. Now God can create free creatures, but He can't cause or determine them to do only what is right. For if He does so, then they aren't significantly free after all; they do not do what is right freely. To create creatures capable of moral good, therefore, He must create creatures capable of moral evil; and He can't give these creatures the freedom to perform evil and at the same time prevent them from doing so. As it turned out, sadly enough, some of the free creatures God created went wrong in the exercise of their freedom; this is the source of moral evil. The fact that free creatures sometimes go wrong, however, counts neither against God's omnipotence nor against His goodness; for He could have forestalled the occurrence of moral evil only by removing the possibility of moral good.                (Plantinga 30)

That is, although God is both omnibenevolent and omnipotent, it was not in his ability to create a world in which there was only moral good and no moral evil if he wished to retain the freedom of human choice, a quality which he considers to be innately and necessarily human. Plantinga defines strong actualization as being the direct cause of some state of affairs (Plantinga 39). Now, if God were to strongly actualize a world in which humans only acted morally as automata with no possibility of moral evil, he believes he would eliminate their free will. On the other hand, Plantinga considers whether God could weakly actualize such a world. To do this, he would strongly actualize a strict subset S of the world W with beings that can act freely, and they would subsequently complete the world W with their own free acts and choices (Plantinga 42). To complete his defense, he introduces the concept of transworld depravity, a notion that in this arbitrary world W there exists some member who—regardless of their environment—will always perform some act of moral evil (Plantinga 48). This must merely be a possibility, and—because it cannot be contradicted, as it is an arbitrary possibility—it illustrates an instance in which God creates a world that contains both moral good and moral evil. In other words, whether or not there is immorality in the world depends solely on the humans who live in the world W, not on God’s power. God desires for humans to possess free will, but once granting this quality cannot intercede and alter the choices of individual autonomous humans as it violates his own desire for free will. It is important to notice that the defense Plantinga presents rests heavily on the assumption that God is constrained by the laws of logic. In addition, he also places incredible value in morally significant freedom, and does not permit other belief systems regarding free will such as determinism. Nonetheless, if one grants Plantinga these assumptions, his argument clearly and effectively invalidates Mackie’s claim of inconsistency. To refute any proposition that claims something is impossible, such as “x is impossible,” it is only necessary to introduce the proposition “x is possible.” These two statements together are logical opposites and cannot simultaneously be true. The claim for possibility does not have to be substantiated by any evidence whatsoever, and Plantinga clearly shows that God could have had a morally sufficient reason for permitting good and evil together. In considering Plantinga’s argument, it is virtually impossible for an atheologian to deny his conclusion because they have no evidence to contradict or disagree with. The only way an atheologian could possibly discredit Plantinga’s defense is by discovering a logical contradiction within his own propositions.

Granting the majority of Plantinga’s counterargument, many philosophers still contend that his response is, in a sense, too easy in that it invalidates Mackie’s claim purely on logic, and does not provide a satisfying alternative that possesses plausibility or evidential support. In 1982, Mackie even acknowledged that Plantinga demonstrated successfully that “…the central doctrines of theism were not inconsistent with one another.” However, he is also clear to challenge whether this is at all a satisfactory solution to the problem of evil in a more comprehensive sense: “But whether this offers a real solution of the problem is another question” (Mackie 1982, pg. 154). In addition to this reservation posed by Mackie, there are a few noteworthy underlying assumptions and inconsistencies in portions of Plantinga’s work that must be addressed for an exhaustive consideration of its cogency. Unfortunately, Mackie must take the blame for claiming logical inconsistency within his description of the problem of evil, for this made the task of refutation reasonably easy for Plantinga. Returning to conclusion of Plantinga’s argument for the coexistence of God and evil, one may reasonably wonder why God would ever choose to risk creating a new world in which free humans could possibly perform acts of moral evil. Plantinga’s makes the claim that a world with significantly free creatures is “more valuable, all else being equal, than a world containing no free creatures at all” (Plantinga 30). This statement seems to place some intrinsic value on the relationship between God and his “children” on Earth, a belief that is entirely religious and dependent on the assumption that God desires only autonomous humans. Without this assumption—which Plantinga does not entertain adequately—his assertion that the world W must contain free creatures is unnecessary, and one could certainly argue that God could have strongly actualized a world, say Q, of humans without the capacity for moral evil. In this case, however, the world Q would contain no evil. In addition, God would have necessarily chosen Q over W because of his omnibenevolence and desire to choose the world with the most moral good and least moral evil.

Plantinga’s Free Will Defense fails to develop a convincing argument against the presence of natural evil in the world. As opposed to moral evil which humans are responsible for, natural evil encompasses all suffering and evil that results from the natural world or non-human events. Granting the presence of moral evil in the world for a moment, there still does not seem to be a good reason for the mass deaths incurred by tsunamis or earthquakes in developing nations nor the suffering and pain that accompanies particularly virulent diseases. Nonetheless, these natural evils exist in the world. Plantinga attempts to resolve the existence of natural evil with the existence of God by claiming that it is the “action of non-human spirits,” such as Satan (Plantinga 58). Justifying the presence of this evil with a circular reference to scripture and Biblical theology is entirely unconvincing for the atheologian, and additionally contradicts one of Mackie’s initial propositions about the definition of God, namely that he is omnipotent. For if God were truly omnipotent and unconstrained in his power, he would be entirely capable of restraining Satan—one the angels he himself brought into existence. In addition, Plantinga claims that natural evil was brought into this world “as part of Adam and Eve's punishment for their sin in the Garden of Eden” (Plantinga 59). This act could certainly be described as vengeful—a quality particularly present in the New Testament—and certainly conflicts with God’s benevolence. More importantly, Plantinga does not even address the issue of original sin within God, Freedom, and Evil. The Christian tenet that all humans are born as sinners before even making any independent moral decisions—what one could consider to be a form of divinely enforced moral evil—suggests that God in entirely incapable of creating a world with no moral evil. In this case, it is not up to the autonomous individuals who compose the world to choose morally good acts, as they have already sullied their reputation as moral agents. Moreover, this inability for God to produce a world without moral evil once again reveals his lack of omnipotence in Mackie’s conception of omnipotence.

Although, according to Plantinga, God may not have been able to strongly actualize a world of free creatures devoid of evil, it does not follow that he would not have been able to weakly actualize a world in which those individuals acted exclusively moral. By Plantinga’s own analysis, God’s omniscience allows him to perceive every member of the set S of all possible worlds created by weakly actualizing a subset of the world W and letting the free creatures complete the rest of the world (Plantinga 48). Because this set S possesses infinite cardinality—there are an unbounded number of possibilities that could exist—there may exist a world Q in which the free creatures completed the world with solely good acts and no moral evil. A fully benevolent God must necessarily choose this world Q, and any rejection of this claim either denies God’s omniscience or his omnipotence. Granted, Plantinga must merely show that his proposal of a world W in which at least one member commits a morally evil act is possible, but by the previous example because such a world Q exists with no evil, God would be required by his good will to pick world Q over W. Ultimately, Plantinga would dispute this argument by contending that: ∀w∈S, ∃p∈w | p commits at least one act of moral evil. Unfortunately, it is hard to determine whether this is a valid possibility, as it requires further discussion on whether propositional constraints can be placed on arbitrary members of an infinite set. Nonetheless, it certainly retains the quality of possibility, and thus we must acknowledge that Plantinga’s response remains valid.
In response to Plantinga’s published response to Mackie in 1974, many atheologians now focus their efforts on considering what some call the probabilistic or evidential problem of evil. According to this approach, every distinct instance of evil—whether natural or moral—serves as evidence against the existence of God and further supports the improbability of God. In particular, philosophers such as Paul Draper argue that the rampant existence of gratuitous evil—or moral or natural evil that serves no identifiable higher purpose—is evidence against the existence of God. With this strategy, the atheologian is also much more capable of generating a coherent argument because the approach constrains a theologian’s counterargument to that of evidence instead of mere possibility. Under scrutiny of the evidentialist approach to the problem of evil, Plantinga’s proposal is entirely invalidated because a defense by definition need only show logical consistency and does not seek to make a compelling case for probability. Granted, simply because there does not seem to be a discernible reason for certain evils in the world does not mean they are purposeless, just as we may believe in many physical realities and choose to accept them without fully understanding them. Furthermore, the will of God may very well be incomprehensible to the humans, and thus it is erroneous to claim any evil is unjustifiable in some absolute sense. Nonetheless, the evidential approach provides a much more level playing field for discussing the coexistence of God and evil, as it requires more insightful explanation into the reasons behind evil. Ultimately, Plantinga’s argument successfully rejects Mackie’s original claim excluding the existence of natural evil, although it seems to leave several questions unanswered in regard to God and evil. The conflicting definitions of omnipotence permeate both Mackie and Plantinga’s arguments, and a much more precise specification is necessary regardless of one’s approach to the problem of evil if philosophers wish to ever agree. But perhaps there in lies the problem: Mackie is a vehement atheist arguing for the nonexistence of God and Plantinga is a Christian arguing for the converse. Because the subject matter is incredibly interpretive by virtue of its history and obscurity at times, it will likely be a topic that continues to persist as long as humans question their beliefs.