---
title: Assessing Armstrong's Theory of the Mind
when: 09.28.2014
---
In “The Nature of the Mind,” David Armstrong delineates an introductory view of physicalism, an ontological theory that contends that everything supervenes on the physical. A professor at the University of Sydney, Armstrong’s philosophical career focused mostly in metaphysics and philosophy of the mind. He begins his essay by asserting that humans have minds that are capable of mental properties or states such as emotions, sensations, beliefs, thoughts, and desires. Armstrong continues by introducing a side argument that concludes that science is the best method for addressing the workings of the mind. He premises this argument firstly on the fact that in science there is a general convergence of thought on many important matters, and that science seems to be the only way humans can seem to reach substantial agreement or intellectual consensus about seriously controversial issues. Secondly, because it is rational to generally accept what other learned scholars or experts believe in, it is then logical to credit the findings of neuroscience and use them as tools to explore the nature of the human mind. His goal is to set forth a purely materialist—or physicalist—account of the mind, one in which our mental properties are equivalent to our physical properties.<!--more-->

Armstrong continues the development of his hypothesis by rejecting previous physicalist beliefs on the relationship between mental states and behavior. The pre-Rylean behaviorists alleged that mental states were simply the exact behaviors of any given being (259). Pointing out that this theory did not account for mental processes that were not realized as actions, British philosopher Gilbert Ryle re-clarified his predecessors by suggesting that mental states were instead dispositions to behave in a certain way under specific circumstances. In contrast, Armstrong rejects Ryle’s notion of disposition, and proposes that a disposition is a mental state that, under certain circumstances, causes various sorts of behavior (262). That is, behavior and overt action supervene on the mental states of humans. Armstrong’s redefinition initially fits within property dualism and physicalism without conflict, as it agrees that the mind is properly conceived as an inner principle. He, however, goes further by asserting that these dispositional states are in fact states of the central nervous system, a view that strictly adheres to physicalism and breaks from substance dualism (264). Having established his account of the mind as an inner state apt for the production of certain sorts of behavior, Armstrong addresses one of the most common objections to his hypothesis.

According to Armstrong, one of the most frequent counterarguments he receives regards the incompatibility of his theory of the mind when applied to a first-person perspective. The motivation for this dissent stems from the fact that external behavioral observation does not accurately address the internal thought processes of humans. In other words, much of Armstrong’s previous arguments are reconcilable with a third-person perspective, but seem to lack consistency when one considers the question of consciousness and the belief that humans can directly perceive themselves and their actions. The denotation of consciousness can be tremendously misleading, as it seems so intimately inherent in humans’ daily lives, yet lacks definitive consensus from psychologists and philosophers alike. Armstrong eventually redefines his notion of consciousness in addressing the first-person perspective, but generally one can consider it to be defined as an immediate awareness of one’s internal thought and processes that does not rest on external observation of behavior, speech, or action. Armstrong begins his refutation by considering an example in which someone has been driving in a car down a road for such a long time that they enter an “unconscious” state in which they still manage to operate the vehicle correctly, but lack their normal faculty for self-awareness (263). Analogously, most people have likely experienced the uncanny feeling when they enter a room having just gotten up for some task, and then forget entirely why they have entered that room. In both of these cases, there is certainly existence of mental activity—as they are able to process information and operate normally—but both lack any further sense of awareness or self-perception during the process. A more formal structure of this common counterargument to Armstrong’s thesis goes as such:
1. There are two major necessary and requisite features of human life: external observation and first-person consciousness and self-awareness.
2. Armstrong’s theory clearly addresses external perception—despite whether one agrees in the soundness of his argument, but does not include the necessary features that make us more than instances of automatism and pure behavior.
Conclusion: Armstrong’s theory of the mind is incomplete because it lacks one of these requisite conditions and thus is inaccurate (262).

Acknowledging the validity and soundness of this counterargument to his initial description of his hypothesis, Armstrong develops a novel definition of consciousness that merges third-person behavior with first-person consciousness and sentience. He begins his clarification by considering the logical tie between sense perception and selective behavior in a given environment (263). For instance, a scientist can determine the presence of color-perception in a particular animal by exposing them to disparate environmental settings and stimuli. The scientist rewards the animal for choosing a distinct color, and eventually can conclude that the animal is actively deciding to choose the color that is rewarded in the environment when it is present. A classic behaviorist would claim that these given behaviors and choices were the perception of the animal, but Armstrong claims in accordance with his hypothesis that color perception is a mental—and thus physical—state itself. He depicts these capacities and perceptions for selective behaviors as keys to unlock certain doors, or actions, in the environment. Every animal has the opportunity to unlock the door if it has the right set of perceptions and is given the correct stimulus, but it is not compulsory. In the automatism cases of driving or entering a room without a known purpose, the key of self-perception and consciousness is still present, but the door remains closed. That is, the person has what Armstrong would call an “internal eye” that is closed during that time rather than open and actively self-evaluating and observing. This eye, or faculty for self-observation, is similar to an animal using its color perception to scan an environment, except that the environment is now one’s own internal mental states. In addition, if this ability is characterized as a mental state within the mind, it must also—by physicalism—be a physical state that is capable of being described in purely physio-chemical terms. With these two former premises, Armstrong concludes that consciousness or self-perception is defined as an “awareness of the state of [one’s] own mind” that operates through one part of the central nervous system scanning and discriminating between distinct mental states of another part of the active neural network (264). 
Armstrong has an elegant solution to the problem of consciousness, but his remedy to the counterargument lacks nuance and firm scientific justification. At the end of the essay, Armstrong craftily includes a short paragraph that disclaims the work as a mere “[program] for a philosophy of mind” that still requires many “expansions and elucidations” along with “doubts and difficulties to be stated and overcome” (264). This clause allows him to argue that his work is incomplete and thus not necessarily ground for meticulous scrutiny. Nonetheless, there exist a few complications with his proposal, most importantly surrounding his description of consciousness. One may legitimately ask whether defining consciousness as purely a self-scanning mechanism in the central nervous system adequately encompasses the intuitive experience of consciousness. It is certainly more than solely a perception and discrimination between other mental states. It includes the ability to experience sensory input, feel aware of oneself and one’s body in space in a proprioceptive sense, introspect and reason about abstract ideas, and subjectively recall past memories. Granted, that is not to say these are the only qualities of consciousness, as philosophy has yet to reach definitive consensus on the notion of self-awareness. Even so, it is reasonable to argue that Armstrong marginalizes much of the important functions of consciousness that extend beyond simply perception of other mental states. Moreover, the physicalist stance leads one to question whether inanimate objects—which are organized pieces of matter just like humans—possess conscious processes and faculties. Most would negate the statement immediately due to an intuitive disagreement with the statement, but physicalism validly presents this possibility. Therefore, not only does he merely resolve only a fragment of the entire counterargument concerning human consciousness, he entirely avoids consideration of non-human sentience. Furthermore, Armstrong completely abstracts away any exposition regarding the neurology of the central nervous system, and leaves us with vague scientific statements in the crucial developments of his argument. For instance, what does it mean for one part of a nervous system to “scan” another portion. Can one control which regions are evaluated in the conscious process? If one chooses to invoke neurological or scientific terms in their premises, it is their obligation to carefully define the vocabulary with great care and precision. Ultimately, Armstrong’s lack of precision of language mixed with his incomprehensible approach to consciousness constitutes an unconvincing response to his opponents.