---
title: Meditation on the Israel and Palestine Conflict
when: 3.27.16
subtitle: A Response to the University of California Adopting a Statement Condemning Anti-Semitism
---
The University of California’s Board of Regents recently approved a resolution overtly condemning anti-semitic views on their college campuses, stating that “anti-Semitism, anti-Semitic forms of anti-Zionism, and other forms of discrimination have no place at the University of California.”

I found myself quite confused in regard to the vociferous and immediate response that came out against the statement, claiming that it was an attempt to repress free speech and political discourse on college campuses. Hold on. Condemnation of any form of racism, prejudice, and ethnic demonization is immoral and reproachable. Briefly setting aside our contemporary situation in the midst of a heated and turbulent election season—in which many candidates have subliminally or manifestly expressed anti-arabic or anti-Islamic sentiments—it is important to realize that any abstract condemnation of prejudice and racism by a university system is warranted at any time.<!--more-->

When taken with our current political climate, there is certainly an understandable reaction from pro-Palestine supporters and two state solution apologists. They feel as though this is an admonishment of pro-Palestine supporters in the University of California system, and a severe rebuke that constrains their first amendment rights. However, I fail to see this subtle angle from the ruling. The Board of Regents was specific in condemning “anti-Semitic forms of anti-Zionism” rather than Theodor Herzl’s entire doctrine of Jewish nationalism and relocation put forth in Der Judenstaat. Had the Board of Regents included anti-Zionism as an equal criticism in their resolution, it would validate a lot more of the reactionists concerns over the matter. However, that is not the situation.

Dima Khalidi, director of Palestine Legal, an Oakland-based legal defense team, commented that pro-Israeli groups had “succeeded in convincing the regents that Palestine advocacy is inherently anti-Semitic, and should be condemned.” I fail to see the language in the resolution which implies or suggests this conflation of ideologies. Khalidi’s concern ought to rest in the redaction and removal of the alleged original agreement including anti-Zionism as a condemnable form of speech on University of California campuses, and push the Board to comment on the reasons for their actions in this context. Furthermore, the statement asserts that anti-Semitism is frequently more insidious and concealed, though they provide no justification of this claim. Shortly after, the resolution states, “…opposition to Zionism is often expressed in ways that are not simply statements of disagreement over politics and policy, but also assertions of prejudice and intolerance toward Jewish people and culture.” Again, there is no provided explanation for why the Board is capable of making such a vast and all-encompassing claim about the rhetoric of ideological detractors. 

Ironically, the Board seems to be propounding an umbrella claim about student activity that identical to the type of conduct they castigate in their own resolution. It might have been a more effective measure to remind the student bodies at all their California campuses that hate speech of any kind—including both anti-Semitic and anti-Islamic discourse—is impermissible in a safe academic environment. This neutrality in declaration might have served to mollify both sides to an extent, while avoiding fanning the already hot flames of polemic already present on their campuses. Instead, it further divides both groups, and provides a clear schism to which advocacy groups can latch on and criticize the measure. This is a quintessential example of the exact type of one-sided, non-diplomatic proposals that further drive these groups apart and engender resentment and hatred.

Genuine concern and discussion with respect to preservation of free speech and first amendment rights on college campuses is unquestionably a worthwhile and necessary conversation to have, especially given recent terrorist attacks in Brussels, Paris, Ivory Coast, and Nigeria, and the ever-present psychological fear of the unabating Islamic State. Nevertheless, this point of contention raised by Khalidi and others seems to lack weight and coherency in this specific case. The Board of Regents argued the resolution was a necessary countermeasure to state vocally and firmly in response to recent hostility toward Jewish students on their campuses. 

Chillingly anti-Semitic messages and statements have appeared across a number of their campuses recently, such as one on a bathroom wall at U.C. Berkeley: “Zionists should be sent to the gas chamber.” Additionally, following various divestment referenda, unknown individuals painted swastikas on Jewish fraternities. These actions are absolutely deplorable and condemnable and the universities on which these events are taking place have a duty to openly and quickly react and oppose such expressions of hate speech. Were someone to inscribe “Muslims are terrorists” on the same wall, there would hopefully be an understandable and immediate response from the Board condemning anti-Islamic rhetoric, as well.

On the other hand, many pro-Israel supporters believe the measure did not go far enough. The so-called B.D.S. (Boycott, Divest, and Sanction) movement on many American college campuses is largely at the heart of the issues, as almost all campus student assemblies have approved divestment referendum despite no response from their respective universities. Tammi Rossman-Benjamin, professor of Hebrew at U.C. Santa Cruz, co-founder of the Amcha Initiative—a group that adamantly fought for the resolution—suggests, “B.D.S. is in virtually all of its aspects anti-Semitic.” While I agree with her claim that there is an unhealthy and prejudicial confounding of Judaism and the pro-Israel movement, in no way is any abstract call for boycott, divestment, and sanctioning of a country or group that expresses a view that one views as hazardous to their community. Many pro-Palestine proponents view the actions of the state of Israel as hazardous both to their educational community, and the state of Palestine, as well. If the language and rhetoric employed in this call of action is anti-Semitic—which it certainly is in some circumstances—then Professor Rossman-Benjamin’s would certainly have grounds for concern. Regardless of this particular language, a B.D.S. movement cannot in itself be a form of racial or religious prejudice absent of justifications. Just as a comprehensive or incisive critique of Islam and its teachings should not be met with cries of Islamaphobia and hate speech, criticism of the state of Israel should not prompt roars of anti-Semitism and anti-Zionism.
One-sided claims such as these are what I believe lie at the heart of the conflict larger Israeli and Palestinian conflict on American college campuses today. Granted, Professor Rossman-Benjamin may be thinking about specific events or conflicts on her own campus in Santa Cruz or in the country at large, but this form of direct and assertive rhetoric corrodes the ability to meet in the middle and calmly discuss the issues at hand.

The very vernacular replete in the media and dialogue—and above in my own work—seems to provoke and encourage an unhealthy dichotomy of opinion on the present and historical conflict between the two groups of peoples. Any individual who maintains a pro- or anti- view on any given conflict of this magnitude is mistakenly marginalizing its history. Every nation and people have shameful and reprehensible pasts in foreign policy, and asserting such a black-and-white view on the situation ignores these subtleties. To make matters worse, many begin these types of conversations with “Well, are you pro-Israel or pro-Palestine?” and there is often an underlying expectation that I feel I must affiliate with a certain side as the discussion progresses. Both Israel and Palestine have sought disproportionate vengeance, killed bystanders and civilians in allegedly justified protection of territory and security, and disseminated blatantly racist and hateful propaganda and political rhetoric. By subscribing to this ostensible dichotomy, one prevents herself from being capable of hearing and truly processing opposing opinions and information. Instead, it draws on our desire for psychological and ideological consistency while putting into question our integrity and intellect. We start feeling and stop listening.

Just as the practice of mindful meditation seeks to separate us from our emotions and thoughts as they wander and pass through our conscious and sub-conscious, it might help to apply a similar principle in consideration of this conflict. Instead of identifying with particular absolute world view or principle, we might let them pass through our minds detached from our identities, as if we were cloaked in a Rawlsian veil of ignorance. Rather than first affiliating and then selectively considering the information and arguments at hand, we might withhold judgment indefinitely while fleetingly identifying with these conflicting thoughts.